---
date: 2020-03-25
title: 'Introduction to MySQL - Part 2'
template: post
thumbnail: '../thumbnails/'
slug: introduction-to-mysql-part-two
categories:
  - Database
tags:
  - mysql
  - database
---

This is the second part of the series to MySQL and if you haven't, you can find the first part of this tutorial series [here](https://fullstackprogrammer.netlify.com/introduction-to-mysql-part-one).<br>

Previously, I gave brief introduction to database and talked about basic mysql commands such as creating database and table, inserting value into the table and CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) operation. In this blog post, I would like to cover the following topics:

- Data Types
- String Functions
- Selection
- Aggregate Functions
- Logical Operators

### Data Types
In SQL, most data can be categorized under three main data types: numeric, string and date. While there are other categories such as unicode, binary and other miscellaneous types, I will not cover them here.<br>

#### Numeric
| Data Type | Description                                     |
|-----------|-------------------------------------------------|
| INT       | EXACT whole number                              |
| DECIMAL   | EXACT decimal number                            |
| FLOAT     | APPROXIMATE decimal number (7 digit precision)  |
| DOUBLE    | APPROXIMATE decimal number (15 digit precision) |

In SQL, numeric data tyeps are either **exact** or **approximate**. While exact numbers give accurate representation of the number's value, approximate numbers are not as accurate (ie. showing 195.000000056 when actual value is 195) due to how computer work with decimal values. Here `INT`, `DECIMAL` are exact numbers and `FLOAT`, `DOUBLE` are approximate numbers. It's generally good practice to use `DECIMAL` over `FLOAT` and `DOUBLE`, especially if we want to store important data that requires high precision such as bank information. This doesn't mean we shouldn't use `FLOAT` and `DOUBLE`, as they can store larger numbers using less space than `DECIMAL`.

Syntax for `DECIMAL`:
```sql
DECIMAL(p,s)
```
* p is the precision which is the maximum total number of decimal digits that will be stored, both to the left and to the right of the decimal point.
* s is the scale which is the number of decimal digits that will be stored to the right of the decimal point.


#### String
| Data Type | Description                |
|-----------|----------------------------|
| CHAR      | FIXED length characters    |
| VARCHAR   | VARIABLE length characters |

`CHAR` is fixed length, meaning it uses exactly same memory space regardless of the characters it holds. If the user stores string that's shorter, string is right padded with space. If the user stores string that's longer, string is truncated to fit the length.<br>

`VARCHAR` is variable length, meaning it only assigns the needed space depending on the length of string.<br>

Most of the time, `VARCHAR` is used instead of `CHAR`. There are some cases, however, when `CHAR` is preferred over `VARCHAR`. For instance, you can use `CHAR` for storing state abbreviation such as 'T' and 'F'.<br>

#### Date
| Data Type | Description                   |
|-----------|-------------------------------|
| DATE      | YYYY-MM-DD                    |
| TIME      | HH:MM:SS                      |
| DATETIME  | YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS           |
| CURDATE   | YYYY-MM-DD (current)          |
| CURTIME   | HH:MM:SS (current)            |
| NOW       | YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS (current) |

While `DATE`, `Time` and `DATETIME` can be used for holding a date variables, we can use `CURDATE`, `CURTIME` and `NOW` to get information about the current time.

#### Formatting Dates
Sometimes when we work with dates, we might want to format the dates to extract certain information, such as the name of the current month or the name of the day. Below, I listed some of the date functions that achieve this:

`MINUTE(DATETIME)` Returns the minute part of a given datetime (0 to 59)<br>
`HOUR(DATETIME)` Returns the hour part of a given datetime<br>

`DAY(DATE)` Returns the day of the month (1 to 31)<br>
`MONTH(DATE)` Returns the month of the specified date (1 to 12)<br>
`YEAR(DATE)` Returns the year of the specified date<br>

`DAYNAME(DATE)` Returns the weekday name for a given date<br>
`DAYOFWEEK(DATE)` Returns the weekday index for a given date (1 to 7)<br>
`DAYOFMONTH(DATE)` Returns the day of the month for a given date (1 to 31)<br>
`DAYOFYEAR(DATE)` Returns the day of the year for a given date (1 to 366)<br>
`MONTHNAME(DATE)` Returns the name of the month for a given date<br>


### String Functions
String functions such as `CONCAT`, `SUBSTRING`, `REPLACE` can be used to manipulate strings. I have listed down some of the important string functions below:

`Concat` <br>
**Add strings together**
```sql
SELECT
    CONCAT(author_fname, ' ', author_lname)
    AS 'full name'
FROM books;
```

`SUBSTRING` <br>
**Get part of string**
```sql
SELECT 
    SUBSTRING(title, 1, 10)
    AS 'short title'
FROM books;
```

`REPLACE` <br>
**Replace 'e' with '3'**
```sql
SELECT 
    REPLACE(title, 'e ', '3') 
    AS 'replaced title'
FROM books;
```

`REVERSE` <br>
**Reverse string**
```sql
SELECT REVERSE(author_fname) FROM books;
```

`CHAR_LENGTH` <br>
**Get length of string**
```sql
SELECT 
    author_lname, 
    CHAR_LENGTH(author_lname) 
    AS 'length' 
FROM books;
```

`UPPER` `LOWER` <br>
**Get upper and lower case string:**
```sql
SELECT 
    UPPER(title),
    LOWER(title)
FROM books;
```

### More Selections
We can refine our selection by using keywords such as `DISTINCT`, `ORDER BY`, `LIMIT`. I have listed some of the keywords below:

`DISTINCT` <br>
**Get unique values**
```sql
SELECT DISTINCT author_lname 
FROM books;
```

`ORDER BY` <br>
**Order values by released year (default ascending order)**
```sql
SELECT title, pages 
FROM books 
ORDER BY released_year;
```

`LIMIT` <br>
**Only select first 5 books**
```sql
SELECT title, released_year 
FROM books 
ORDER BY released_year DESC 
LIMIT 5;
```

`LIKE` `%` <br>
**Get books that ends with 'the'**
```sql
SELECT title 
FROM books 
WHERE title 
LIKE '%the';
```

`LIKE` `_` <br>
**Get books that have stock quantity of 4 digits**
```sql
SELECT title, stock_quantity 
FROM books 
WHERE stock_quantity 
LIKE '____';
```

Note that `%` and `_` is called wildcards.

### Aggregate Functions
An aggregate function allows you to perform a calculation on a set of values to return a single scalar value. I listed down some of the important aggregate functions below:<br>

`COUNT` <br>
**Get count of all rows/records in a table**
```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) 
FROM books;
```

`GROUP BY` <br>
**Groups records together by last name (eg. all authors with same last name will be in same group)**
```sql
SELECT title, author_fname, author_lname 
FROM books 
GROUP BY author_lname;
```

`MIN` <br>
Get minimum value:
```sql
SELECT MIN(pages)
FROM books;
```

`MAX` <br>
Get maximum value:
```sql
SELECT MAX(pages) 
FROM books;
```

`SUM` <br>
Get summation of values:
```sql
SELECT SUM(pages)
FROM books;
```

`AVG` <br>
Get average of values:
```sql
SELECT AVG(pages) 
FROM books;
```
<br>

#### Logical Operators
The Logical operators are operators that either return true or false. They are primarily used with `WHERE` clause

`AND` `&&`<br>
**Return true if all the conditions separated by AND are true**
```sql
SELECT 1 < 5 && 7 = 9;
```

`OR` `||`<br>
**Return true if any of the conditions separated by OR is true**
```sql
SELECT 40 <= 100 || -2 > 0;
```

`NOT`<br>
**Words that doesn't start with the letter 'W'**
```sql
SELECT title 
FROM books 
WHERE title NOT LIKE 'W%';
```

`Between`<br>
**Find records where released year is between 2004 and 2015**
```sql
SELECT title, released_year 
FROM books 
WHERE released_year BETWEEN 2004 AND 2015;
```

`IN`<br>
**Find records where customers' country is either from US or UK**
```sql
SELECT * 
FROM Customers
WHERE Country IN ('United States', 'UK');
```

## Conclusion
I hope most of the SQL commands presented here are straight forward and easy to understand. I still haven't covered some of the topics in sql, such as relationships between tables (ie. one to one, one to many, many to many). I will probably cover them in the future posts but for now, I would like to move on to other topics in the upcoming post.